>>>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>It felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
It's good to have you back.
You know, we have been talking
about so many different issues
on "Beyond Belief" over
the last couple years,
but this one is a scary one.
It's Ebola.
To date, nearly
6,000 people have
died across this
planet from Ebola.
Now, that might not seem
like a lot of people,
but the problem is, is
that 70% of the people who
seem to contract Ebola die.
Our special guest
on "Beyond Belief"
is the author of "Pandemic"
and "Bowling for Ebola,"
infectious disease
expert Dr. Gary Ridenour.
Gary, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>GARY RIDENOUR:
Thank you, George.
Pleasure to be here.
>>NOORY: This is a
very, very tense moment
on this planet with Ebola.
Can you take us
back a little bit?
We've had Ebola
scares and outbreaks
before, but never
quite like this one.
What happened?
>>RIDENOUR: Well, the original
Ebola happened in 1976,
and it was near the Ebola River.
Fortunately, not a large
population density.
It was easily controlled.
It was studied.
There were a couple a more
little teeny outbreaks.
And in this one, the
virus is from an area,
like, 1,000 miles away and
suddenly popped up in Liberia.
And with the dense population
and with the people
being about maybe 50% literate,
it got a good foothold,
and took off, and spread
to other countries.
>>NOORY: Why is it
so resis-- resilient?
It is so powerful.
>>RIDENOUR: Well,
the main problem
is is that it's
very, very simple.
It's one strand of RNA that
has only seven genes on it.
And once it gets into your
body, it gets into the cells,
hijacks your DNA, and gets
your own DNA to replicate more
of them.
But it gets into nerve cells,
liver cells, stomach cells,
intestinal cells.
I mean, it infects
every cell every cells.
And as a result,
horrible, bloody vomiting.
You can hardly walk.
The diarrhea is just--
>>NOORY: They bleed
out of the eyes?
>>RIDENOUR: Bleed
out of the eyes.
Explosive diarrhea
14, 20 times a day.
So without the proper
equipment over there--
I mean, they got them in
tents, and they're on cots,
and they're trying
to feed them soup.
Without IV therapy
and good machinery
to see what the
sodium potassium is,
they're going to die on you.
Because they're going to
be dehydrated, or kidneys
shut down.
And that's the end.
>>NOORY: What's the difference
between a virus and a bacteria?
>>RIDENOUR: OK.
One bacteria is about 100
times bigger than a virus.
A bacteria is living.
Inside a bacterial cell, it has
a good manufactured covering
on it.
It may even have a little tail
on the back called a flagella
to make it move around.
Inside, it has chemicals
and other parts
of regular human cells that
allows it to have metabolism.
It has eight chromosomes in it.
And what they do
is that they get
in the spaces between
tissue and grow,
and then they divide
and then divide again.
And it also sends off
a chemical messenger
so that the area's flooded
with white blood cells
and antibiotics seem to work
quite well against them.
>>NOORY: Now, when you
say bacteria is alive,
what do you mean by that?
>>RIDENOUR: Well, it's
kind of hard to-- alive
meaning that this thing
requires nutrition.
It requires water.
It has a complex
chemical reaction in it
to make the chemical
for power for the cell.
It's mobile.
And sometimes it'll meet
up with another cell
and they'll exchange RNA
material between each other.
So on the technical
side, because it
can do all these things, they
consider it a living organism.
And it's pretty prehistoric.
They were here before we were.
>>NOORY: Does it have--
this may sound silly,
but does it have its own brain?
Does it think?
Does it reason?
>>RIDENOUR: No.
Once again, it's simplified only
to get enough nourishment so it
can divide into two more
cells and replicate itself.
And then 20 minutes later,
you've got four cells.
you've got more cells.
So it grows very quickly.
>>NOORY: I mean, does
it get to the point
where-- I mean, this
is really fascinating.
Like, if an antibiotic--
assuming some of them
work-- pops its way into your
body, does the bacterium say,
"oh no!
An antibiotic is coming my way."
Is it smart enough to
try to get away from it?
>>RIDENOUR: Antibiotic
resistance is well known.
And one of the things is, is
that at its division rate,
it's probably going through
over two million years
of evolution in one year, OK?
They're not going to turn
into worms or anything,
because they don't
have enough DNA.
But because they're
replicating so fast,
they run into an
antibiotic, they
may be able to adjust to be
resistant to the antibiotic.
>>NOORY: What came
first, the bacteria
or the cells that would be
the building blocks of life?
>>RIDENOUR: That
goes back to what
came first, the
chicken or the egg,
and the farther we get
back, it gets controversial.
They may have been
together at the same time,
but they think
the bacterial cell
borrowed some other
free floating cells,
like mitochondria, and
brought them inside of them.
The Ebola can be found
in the fossil record.
That's how old it is.
>>NOORY: OK.
And let's jump ahead,
then, to a virus.
What is a virus?
>>RIDENOUR: OK.
A virus is very, very simple.
There's a package,
and the package
is made by the
cell it is in, OK?
And inside the package is
simply a number of RNA strands.
So what happens is the
virus attaches to a cell,
opens its way up, and the RNA
goes in and hijacks our DNA.
And our own cell--
>>NOORY: Cell by cell.
>>RIDENOUR: Starts
replicating viruses like crazy
until, usually, the
cell wall explodes.
>>NOORY: The virus,
though, is not alive.
So how in the hack
can an inanimate
object, like a virus, that's
not alive do these things?
>>RIDENOUR: It's because
of its genetic programming.
The genetic programming is
superior to being a life form.
This thing is designed
to do only one thing.
It's eliminated locomotion.
It's eliminated brain.
It's eliminated any
metabolism or anything.
It's just nothing
but a container
to get in and do
what all things do,
which is to
replicate themselves.
>>NOORY: Is it like computer
software, whereby the software,
it's not alive, but it
sure functions and does
a lot of things.
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
And it's kind of like the
virus in computer software,
where the virus gets in,
and gets into programs,
and then replicates off to other
programs and disables them.
But the average
person with Ebola
puts out about 23 billion
Ebola viruses a year.
>>NOORY: All right, so when
you try to kill a virus,
that's not even a right phrase.
Because you can't
kill what's not alive.
So how do you eradicate
something that's not alive?
>>RIDENOUR: Well, one thing you
can do is expose it to heat.
Five minutes at boiling
will destroy it.
Having it out on a
dry surface, it'll
stay for four to six hours.
And because it's dry and
warm, the virus will die.
Chlorinated water, like the
equivalent of pool water,
will kill them.
>>NOORY: Which you shouldn't
drink at that rate.
>>RIDENOUR: No.
But you can spray it
all over yourself.
>>NOORY: Kills it instantly?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Again, I said it again.
I said kill.
I got to stop saying that.
>>RIDENOUR: Eliminate.
>>NOORY: Eliminate.
>>RIDENOUR: It eliminates them.
And so that's very,
very efficient.
The problem is is not
so much killing them.
>>NOORY: See?
You said it, too.
>>RIDENOUR: I know.
Eradicating them.
The problem is is
that they're talking
about trying to get
a vaccine for it.
The problem is is that there
are four subtypes to the virus,
and when it's replicating 250
trillion replications a day,
which virus are you
going to go after?
Because this thing may be a
different animal next week.
>>NOORY: And how does
Ebola differ from,
for example, the AIDS virus?
>>RIDENOUR: AIDS virus
is also an RNA virus.
It also gets in,
it affects cells.
Tends to hit more of
the immune system.
So you die from secondary
infections and things.
Also Ebola, when it
gets in your body,
it goes into your lymph nodes.
It goes into your
nervous system.
It's a very efficient infector.
>>NOORY: Who would
invent this stuff?
Who came up with it?
The Creator?
And why?
>>RIDENOUR: Good question.
It could be the Creator.
It could be just a series
of accidents that happened
and this stuff appeared.
The farther we get back in time,
the murkier the whole subject
becomes.
Because they're still
fighting like dogs and cats
about who came first
and who did what.
And we don't have
much evidence on that.
>>NOORY: Let's talk
now about what's
been happening in Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Guinea,
and now Mali is getting
affected-- 6 plus cases.
About a month ago, Gary,
I was at the Four Seasons
in Los Angeles.
And I'm sitting there,
and there's a guy.
He's an art salesman from Mali.
And I'm saying to myself, God,
I wonder if he's got Ebola.
And at that point, there
were no cases in Mali.
Now that's an area that the
World Health Organization
and the United Nations is
very concerned about as well.
It does seem to slowly
spread, doesn't it?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah, it does.
And the problem is
that they're talking
about 21 day quarantines
and stuff for people
flying in from those areas.
And you and I have talked
before about the fact
that why don't we have the
people in, let's say Liberia,
you buy a plane ticket
three weeks in advance.
And most Ebola patients
develop symptoms in 10 days.
So you'd be two periods of
possibly developing Ebola.
So when you get to
the gate, chances
would be that you
would be clean.
>>NOORY: Unless you
just got it, right?
>>RIDENOUR: Unless
you just got it.
Yeah, that's the problem.
And then you contaminate the
plane and everything else
in them.
>>NOORY: How do
you eradicate this?
How do you-- worldwide,
how do you stop this?
>>RIDENOUR: Well,
you have to-- we're
going the wrong way right now.
The United States government--
Obama's got a $6 billion
bill he wants to put through.
And it's going to cost
close to $40 billion.
You've got to get out into the
bush and get into every village
and show them how
to wash their hands.
And four weeks ago,
missionaries were
chopped to death in a village
because the villagers thought
that they were the evil ones
bringing in the disease.
>>NOORY: They chopped them up?
>>RIDENOUR: They chopped
them up and killed them.
And so now a lot of people who
have Ebola keep mom at home.
Because the guy down
the street got Ebola,
and the devils in the plastic
suits came and took him.
And then five days later, they
brought him back in a body bag.
Well, what did they do to them?
So we're not going to let
mom go with these devils.
>>NOORY: Is there a
way, Gary, that you
can build your immune
system to fight off a virus?
>>RIDENOUR: No, not on this one.
And of course, naturally,
with this panic
there's a lot of
companies out there.
Take mine, take this, take that.
And what the Ebola does once
it gets in the lymph nodes,
it stimulates a couple
of chemical messengers
and produces something which
we call a cytokine storm.
And if you have a really
good immune system,
that cytokine storm will destroy
the cells with the virus in it
and other cells, too.
And what it does to
stop that, the Ebola
infects so many
of the lymph nodes
that your immune system
actually goes down.
That's all there is to it.
>>NOORY: There's been talk
that Ebola was created
in a laboratory and set
loose to try to wipe out
these third world
nations, as they
said about AIDS a
long time ago as well.
Conceivable that this was
concocted in a laboratory?
>>RIDENOUR: Don't
think so, because we
can find it in
the fossil record.
So unless somebody 200 million
years ago was doing it,
it's been around.
>>NOORY: Would you, as an
infectious disease expert,
would you go to these
troubled nations
right now if they asked you to?
Or would you be a
little skittish?
>>RIDENOUR: Skittish.
The main reason is, is that the
gloves, the boots, the hats,
and all that stuff you
put on to go in and take
care of a patient, that's
70-year-old technology, OK?
And so what you
need to do is to go
into a completely
self-contained suit,
and go in, and take
care of the patient.
Then come out, and you could
stand, put your arms out
in the shower, and get washed
down with chlorine water
really well, take the
suit off, get washed down
with the chlorine water, get
your feet, wash everything.
Take your clothes,
and throw them out,
and get into a paper
jumpsuit, and then head out
to get your regular clothes.
What these people
are doing is, is
that when they come out
of the contaminated room
to the clean room, they just
start grabbing the stuff
and pulling it off.
And there's a little bit
of secretion on this glove.
They don't see it.
It gets on their fingertip.
They go out to lunch and
put it in their mouth,
and away it goes.
>>NOORY: I'm told, Gary, that
UV light, ultraviolet light,
can kill-- there we go again--
can eradicate this virus.
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah, it can.
We've known for 100 years that
ultraviolet can kill bacteria.
And there's a new
machine out there now
called a Xenax machine,
and it has developed
an ultraviolet light that's
25,000 times stronger
than regular ultraviolet light.
And the machine will come into
a room, and it starts flashing.
And in five minutes, it's
flashed the entire room.
A person that's
really conscientious
and is really cleaning with
a rag and chlorine water
is only about 70% efficient.
This Xenax machine,
everywhere that light hits,
there's no bacteria,
fungus, or viruses.
And it's very good
at killing Ebola.
So, example, you could
take this machine,
roll it down the aisle
of an empty plane
and just flash all the seats.
And on the way back, flash
all the backs of the seats.
Your plane's clean.
>>NOORY: And light, of
course, will hit everything.
>>RIDENOUR: It does.
Yeah.
And they've got a couple of
them out in a couple hospitals.
The reports have
been really good.
And they're working on
a more portable version
now so that the health care
worker comes and stands
in front of the machine and gets
flashed, and then turns around
and gets five minute
of flashings this way.
They're completely clean.
>>NOORY: So what
does an Ebola virus
look like when it's functioning?
And then what does
it look like when
you've zapped it
with a UV light?
>>RIDENOUR: OK.
What it is is that viruses--
>>NOORY: Do you
see a difference?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
Viruses come in
different shapes.
And the Ebola virus, it looks
like a shepherd's crook.
It's kind of a filament and
it has little hook on the end.
Inside of it is your seven
genes wrapped on RNA.
And there are little
bitty mucus plugs
on the outside of the gene
so that it'll stick to a cell
and help to dissolve, to
make a hole in the cell
so the virus can go in.
And what the
ultraviolet light does
is that it messes the
genetic code up on the genes
so they won't replicate.
>>NOORY: So what does it look
like after you've zapped it?
>>RIDENOUR: I would say
it's going to look like kind
of a slightly
shrunken up looking--
>>NOORY: More shriveled up and--
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah,
shriveled and cooked.
That would be the best way.
>>NOORY: So why even have
these viruses on this planet?
I've always believed
that there's
a reason for everything, right?
Or it shouldn't be here.
Even the mosquito-- god
forbid-- but the birds eat them,
and things like that.
What's the purpose of a virus
like Ebola for crying out loud?
>>RIDENOUR: Well,
it's definitely
not intelligent design, I mean
for those who believe that,
but they came at the
beginning of life
and developed themselves
through trial and error
to become a virus, and to
just replicate themselves
every time they get into a cell.
But they could have been
in prehistoric animals way
before they were inside of us.
>>NOORY: All right.
I come to you.
I have Ebola.
You're an infectious
disease expert.
What happens to me?
What do we do?
>>RIDENOUR: Well,
unfortunately, a lot of places
stall and have no idea
what they're doing.
Put a mask on you--
>>NOORY: Do I come
through an emergency room?
>>RIDENOUR: Most people would.
>>NOORY: And people
are panicking, right?
Oh my god.
This guy's got Ebola.
Get out!
>>RIDENOUR: And
that's the big bugaboo
about this is is that the
test is called a PCR test.
And not everybody has it.
So you come in and you're sick,
we'll wear gloves and kind of
be careful with you.
But it could be hours
or days before I
get my Ebola test back.
So we put you in isolation.
>>NOORY: And I'm
getting worse, right?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
And, naturally, from the
explosive diarrhea and things,
you've got to pour tons
of fluids into them.
And you look at their
sodium and potassium levels
to make sure that you're
getting the right amount in,
and just saturate
them with the fluids.
There's no known treatment.
There was an antibody
called Zmapp,
and that was developed by the
US Army Medical Research people
under a black project for
three years and $10 million.
They developed an antibody that
when you gave it to monkeys
on the first day
of their infection,
they had 100% survival.
As you go out, the
survival rate goes phew.
So when they heard
they were going
to bring that first
doctor back, they, quote,
humanized the virus and
gave it to the doctor.
And he was so many days out
I don't think it worked.
And nobody's banging their
drum that that antibody worked.
>>NOORY: Can the human
body fight it by itself?
>>RIDENOUR: No, because it's
overwhelming the human body.
It's killing your immune system.
>>NOORY: So even one virus, one
tiny little virus in the body,
would replicate and grow?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah, exactly.
If it could make it in.
Not only does it destroy
your immune system,
it's in your nervous system.
The diarrhea could be
15, 20 times a day.
You see people coming into
clinics not wearing pants,
because they can't control it.
So what you've got
to do is that you're
looking at extreme dehydration.
And so even if you
had an immune system,
it wouldn't be
able to get around,
because there's no
fluids in your body.
>>NOORY: Wow.
What about probiotics?
Would they help you?
>>RIDENOUR: No.
In fact, there's a big push
right now to develop vaccines.
And I saw a panel discussion,
and Dr. Osterholm,
who has a site called
cidrap, C-I-D-R-A-P,
and he stopped all the
experts and just went,
there isn't going
to be a vaccine.
And then a man in the
audience stood up and said,
I'm from Liberia.
I'm a US citizen.
12 of my family
members have died.
You guys haven't talked
about Africa at all.
And Dr. Osterholm
said, there's a strike
on right now in Liberia
because the health care
workers can't get
gloves or masks.
He says, I can order
an iPhone and have
it made in Canada--
I mean, in China,
and have it in my
hands in one week.
He goes, is that
telling you something
about what's going wrong here?
>>NOORY: Is there a secret
conspiracy behind any of this?
>>RIDENOUR: I-- yeah,
I will say, yes.
Because it's becoming
a political football.
Before the elections, that's
all you heard about was Ebola.
Elections were over, it
just fell off the strain.
And so you've got to get
on the net to follow it.
And the reason it's going to be
a little conspiracy thing is,
is that Obama's Keystone
Pipeline was blocked,
and it's not going anywhere.
And the Republicans
are mad about that
because there were backing it.
So when Obama comes
out with a 6.2 billion
dollar plan for Ebola,
they're going to gun it down.
And it's just-- they asked
the experts if you've got it
and you don't have
symptoms, could you
give it to other people?
And they went, we don't know.
And they went, what about
the dog carrying it?
You know, they shot a dog?
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RIDENOUR: And they went, uh,
we don't know about that one
either.
And, basically, we're
jumping into it.
We got the 101st
Airborne over there.
And you're just
jumping off a cliff,
because you have no
idea where the bottom's
at with this thing.
>>NOORY: Tell me about your
book "Bowling for Ebola."
>>RIDENOUR: All right.
"Bowling for Ebola" is--
the reason I call it that is
is that every time Ebola
comes up and throws the ball,
it's a strike.
Every time the world
comes up, the ball
goes backwards into the
crowd, or your fingers
get stuck in the ball,
or it goes in the gutter,
or it goes halfway
down and stops.
And we haven't knocked
a pin over yet.
All we're doing right now--
>>NOORY: No strikes.
>>RIDENOUR: We're just
doing supportive care.
But in Liberia, you
get a cot and they
try to bring you
soups and things
to drink because they
have no IV fluids.
And Liberia-- 90% of the people
in Liberia are unemployed.
Most places have no
electricity, sewage, or water.
And the police and
fire departments
gave up a long time ago.
>>NOORY: So why
would this virus seem
to hit these areas, these
poor areas in West Africa?
>>RIDENOUR: Well, first
theory-- and they're still not
sure on this one either-- is
that there is a fruit bat that
is rather large, and
they catch the bat,
and they cook him for protein.
But they also take the bat,
cooked bat, into the cities,
and they sell it as
what's called "bushmeat."
So people eat that
contaminated bat,
and they get Ebola
that way, too.
And then the other theory is
that the monkeys' droppings are
falling on food that
somebody may eat and get it.
So, basically, it's just
more of a geological thing.
I mean, you got heavy rains,
jungle area, this is all great.
And the unfortunate thing,
there are 15 countries
across the center of Africa
that are prime places
to grow the bacteria.
>>NOORY: Will the virus travel
in water, or will it die?
>>RIDENOUR: It'll
travel in secretions.
It'll travel in water.
That's the one of
the problems with it.
They had the rainy season,
and a lot of these villages
have no bathrooms.
And, like I said, over
50% illiteracy rate.
So trying to go to
a village just to
show them how to
wash their hands.
We're so far behind
with these people
that it just naturally
keeps moving.
>>NOORY: Gary, the virus
Marburg, is that like Ebola?
>>RIDENOUR: It is somewhat.
In fact, when Ebola
first came out,
they thought it was Marburg.
And it wasn't.
Marburg is still out there
and causing some infections
in Saudi Arabia.
>>NOORY: It's very
similar, right?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
But Saudi's got
good health care.
I mean, they've got sewages.
They've got good doctors,
and so it's contained.
Right now, some states
in the United States
have a doctor ratio of one
doctor to 1,900 people.
Liberia right now, has
a ratio of, I think,
one doctor per 100,000.
>>NOORY: Wow.
It's not going to happen.
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
And you got 15,000 people
infected right now.
If you want to take
care of those 15,000,
you have to bring
50,000 people in
to give them nursing
care around the clock.
>>NOORY: It's not
going to happen.
>>RIDENOUR: Doctors, chemistry
machines, good buildings,
lots of IV solutions, people
to bury these people, people
to go out and find
them in villages
and probably have to fight to
get them out of the village
and get them in.
So it's just an impossible task,
because before the CDC a week
ago, before the elections,
they said worst case
scenario 1.2 million by January.
Now, I don't know what the
elections had to do with this,
but after the elections,
the CDC pulled in and went,
we're wrong.
>>NOORY: Too high.
>>RIDENOUR: Worse case
scenario's going to be 100,000.
It doesn't make any difference.
A million or a 100,00, we've got
no capabilities to handle that.
>>NOORY: Is it airborne?
If I sneezed on you and had
Ebola, would you get it?
>>RIDENOUR: Hot topic.
CDC said no.
And first, CDC said
that if you put Ebola
on a table top, three
to five hours it's gone.
Now it's four to six days
they've picked it up.
The airborne--
>>NOORY: You can't
see it, right?
You can't see it.
>>RIDENOUR: No, you can't.
No, well.
>>NOORY: Too small?
>>RIDENOUR: It is
100,000 times smaller
than the diameter of a hair.
>>NOORY: Aww,
you'll never see it.
>>RIDENOUR: Never see it.
>>NOORY: Look down there,
you wouldn't see Ebola.
>>RIDENOUR: No.
And so for a while they were
saying, oh, it's not airborne.
We're very afraid that it
may mutate to being airborne.
Then the CDC
backtracked and said,
uh, but if a guy's got
Ebola and he sneezes at you,
you're going to get it.
So--
>>NOORY: So they've
changed their posture.
>>RIDENOUR: But then they go,
but it's not really airborne
yet.
>>NOORY: So if you were on a
plane next to someone who just
seemed to have sniffles
and wheezing and coughing
and came from that
region of West Africa,
would you want to
get up and move?
>>RIDENOUR: That might be
a good idea, to move away.
>>NOORY: So what do you
say the flight attendant?
I think this person
has Ebola, and they're
sneezing on me or something?
>>This gentleman's very
sick, and he's bothering me,
and I don't want to
get what he's got.
>>NOORY: Sorry, sir.
The plane is full, and you're
going to have to sit there.
And we're already in the air.
>>RIDENOUR: Can I
sit in the toilet?
I mean, that's the problem.
>>NOORY: You really want
to go into the restroom
after he was in there?
>>RIDENOUR: Well, that's why
the Xenax machine goes down
the aisle of a plane and
sterilizes all the seats
and carpeting on the way down.
>>NOORY: You just aim it?
>>RIDENOUR: Yeah.
You drive it.
It's like R2D2, and
it's about that tall.
Head comes up, and you sterilize
all the seats going down.
You turn around.
On the way back,
you get the backs
of the seats and the carpeting.
And it's clean.
>>NOORY: Well, thank you, Gary.
The information
is very valuable.
I mean, not a lot
of people understand
Ebola and what it
does, what causes it.
But if you listen to an
expert like Gary Ridenour,
you get a better idea
of what this is, just
to protect you and your family.
I'm George Noory, and
thanks for watching
this edition of "Beyond Belief."